Windows content lab (#3)
rhpds/ansible-super-lab-showroom: documentation/modules/ROOT/pages/20-content-windows.adoc

= Lab: Content for Managing Windows Servers

[abstract]
In this lab we will develop a custom Ansible collection to manage a Windows server in our lab that will represent an example enterprise environment. We will build the content a piece at a time until the full collection is ready to be deployed. The server will be configured to run a custom website, have chocolatey software manager installed, and filebeat installed and configured.

== Learning Objectives

After completing this module, you will be able to:

. Connect and check connectivity to Windows servers from AAP

> . Use ansible.windows and microsoft.iis collections

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Use `ansible.windows` and `microsoft.iis` collections
```

. Ensure prerequisites are installed

> . Install and use Chocolatey

Reviewer: To do what?

Author: Only for Filebeat so far, but I have some additional ideas if time permits.

. Install and configure filebeat

== 1: Managing Windows Hosts

> Ansible can use a variety of connectivity options to connect to Windows. In this lab a Windows 2019 Server has been configured using `psrp` to connect. See the link:https://docs.ansible.com/projects/ansible/latest/os_guide/intro_windows.html[Ansible documentation] for full details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ansible can use a variety of connectivity options to connect to Windows. In this lab, a Windows 2019 Server has been configured using `psrp` to connect. See the link:https://docs.ansible.com/projects/ansible/latest/os_guide/intro_windows.html[Ansible documentation] for full details.
```

+
image::20-content-windows/aap_run_command.png[Run Command]
+
. For **Module** choose **win_ping** from the drop-down then **Next**
+
image::20-content-windows/aap_win_ping.png[Module]
+
. For **Execution Environment** just choose **Next** without a selection, it will use the default EE
. For **Credential** select **Windows** then **Next**
+
image::20-content-windows/aap_run_command_credential.png[Credential]
+
. Finally, choose **Finish**. The job will run and you will be taken to the **Jobs** section
. After a few seconds a result will display which should resemble this output:
+
image::20-content-windows/aap_run_command_results.png[Results]

=== 1.2: Review Connectivity Details

In the previous section an ad-hoc command was run to verify connectivity. Let's review some of these artifacts used to connect to Windows:

. Navigate to **Automation Execution** -> **Infrastructure** -> **Hosts**
. Notice that unlike when selecting *Inventories* as was done in the previous section, looking directly at the **Hosts** section does *NOT* allow running ad-hoc commands
+
image::20-content-windows/aap_hosts.png[AAP Hosts]
+
. Select the **windows** host

> . Review the defined variables for connecting using `psrp`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Review the defined variables for connecting using `psrp` by clicking the **Details** tab
```

+
image::20-content-windows/aap_windows_host_vars.png[Windows host variables]
+
. Navigate to **Credentials** in this same **Infrastructure** subsection under **Automation Execution**
. Select the **Windows** credential
+
image::20-content-windows/aap_windows_credential.png[Windows credential]
+

> . These values should be pre-populated with {windows_admin_user} and {windows_admin_password} from the xref:environment-details.adoc[Environment Details,window=_blank] page.

Reviewer: We'll need to chat with the RHDP team to discuss how to propagate this variable up to the showroom as its not appearing currently

=== 1.3: Connectivity Options

Some of you may be wondering what `psrp` is, rather than the typical `winrm` connection used. `psrp` is a newer protocol that has several advantages over legacy `winrm`. `psrp` does still in fact run over WinRM but uses PowerShell Remoting Protocol for execution, similar to native powershell `Invoke-Command`, rather than WinRM's SOAP based WS-Management. `psrp` also supports authentication negotiation, which allows for less explicit configuration allowing Ansible to negotiate the most effective and secure authentication transport.

Bonus lab: If desired, feel free to replace the `psrp` connection details with `winrm` for comparison

. Navigate to **Automation Execution** -> **Infrastructure** -> **Hosts**
. Select the **windows** host
. In the upper right, select **Edit Host**
. At the bottom of the page edit the **Variables** section
. For reference, here are the variables as defined using `psrp`
+
[source,yaml]
----
ansible_connection: psrp
ansible_psrp_auth: negotiate
ansible_psrp_cert_validation: ignore
----
+

> . Replace with the following variables. Unlike with `psrp` which can auto-negotiate, you must specify a transport for `winrm` so pick one of the three defined below. Feel free to try all three, but only one at a time. NOTE: Additional options include `certificate` and `kerberos`, which are not configured in this lab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Replace with the following variables. Unlike with `psrp` which can auto-negotiate, you must specify a transport for `winrm` so pick one of the three defined below in the `ansible_winrm_transport` property. Feel free to try all three, but only one at a time. NOTE: Additional options include `certificate` and `kerberos`, which are not specified/configured in this lab.
```

+
[source,yaml]
----
ansible_connection: winrm
ansible_winrm_server_cert_validation: ignore
ansible_winrm_transport: basic|ntlm|credssp
----
+
. Before finishing this lab, ensure the `psrp` configuration is replaced.

== 2: Build Content for Managing Windows

> In this section we will begin building content to setup and configure our Windows server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we will begin building content to setup and configure our Windows server
```

=== 2.1: Create a playbook directory structure

. Use `ansible-creator` to quickly scaffold a directory structure:
+
[source,bash]
----
ansible-creator init playbook red_hat_one.super_lab /projects/lab_playbooks/
----
+
. Add a new role to manage the software filebeat
+
[source,bash]
----
ansible-creator add resource role manage_filebeat /projects/lab_playbooks/collections/ansible_collections/red_hat_one/super_lab/
----
+

> . Open the files at a lower level of the directory structure in order to see all of these files in VSCode by selecting the hamburger (3 dashes) menu in the top left and choosing **Files** -> **Open Folder**

Reviewer: Add a screenshot

    var: website_status
    verbosity: 1
...
----
+
. Create the `files/index.html.j2` file:
+
[source,bash]
----
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
    <title>Server Info</title>
</head>
<body>
    <h1>Welcome to Super Lab IIS Server</h1>
    <p><strong>Machine ID:</strong> {{ ansible_facts['machine_id'] }}</p>
    <p><strong>Hostname:</strong> {{ ansible_facts['fqdn'] + '.' + ansible_facts['interfaces'][0]['dns_domain'] }}</p>
    <p><strong>Deployed on:</strong> {{ ansible_facts['date_time']['date'] }} at {{ ansible_facts['date_time']['time'] }}</p>
</body>
</html>
----
+
. Finally in the role, create a new task file called `filebeat.yml`
+
[source,yaml]
----
---
- name: Install a filebeat with Chocolatey
  chocolatey.chocolatey.win_chocolatey:
    name: filebeat
    state: present
...
----
+
. Next, edit `tasks/main.yml` and replace the contents with the following:
+
[source,yaml]
----
---
- name: Include prerequisite tasks
  ansible.builtin.include_tasks:
    file: prerequisites.yml

- name: Include web server tasks
  ansible.builtin.include_tasks:
    file: web_server.yml

- name: Include filebeat tasks
  ansible.builtin.include_tasks:
    file: filebeat.yml
...
----
+

> . The file structure should look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. The file structure should look similar to the following:
```

+
image::20-content-windows/role_dir_tree.png[Role Structure]
+
. Next, create a playbook to call this role at **/projects/lab_playbooks/** Replace the contents of `site.yml` with this:
+
[source,bash]
----
---
- name: Playbook to call Filebeat role
  hosts: windows
  tasks:
    - name: Call filebeat role
      ansible.builtin.include_role:
        name: red_hat_one.super_lab.manage_filebeat
...
----

=== 2.2: Test this content

IMPORTANT: ToDo: Figure out if we can test directly from Dev Spaces, otherwise using RHEL bastion might be needed to avoid a slow outer loop

== 3: Next Steps

> In the next lab we will create an execution environment containing this collection and a corresponding playbook to call this new role.

Author: That's the next lab. Yes, I plan to reuse as much as possible. This lab will create and briefly test the content, then next lab will move on to creating the EE

== Conclusion

In this lab, you have learned:

. How to validate connectivity to Windows servers from AAP
. Using ansible-creator to scaffold directories for efficient content creation

> . Create content using ansible.windows and microsoft.iis collections

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create content using the `ansible.windows` and `microsoft.iis` Collections
```

. Create content to ensure prerequisites are installed including .NET and Chocolatey

> . Use Chocolatey to install filebeat

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Use Chocolatey to install Filebeat
```

Need to introduce both Chocolatey and Filebeat

. Launch the link:{openshift_cluster_console_url}[OpenShift Web Console,window=_blank]
. Select the **htpasswd_provider** button and use the credentials provided in the xref:environment-details.adoc[Environment Details,window=_blank] page to login to the OpenShift console
. Use the 9-block icon in the upper right to launch _Red Hat OpenShift Dev Spaces_ directly from the OpenShift console header.

=== 2.1: Build Collection and Roles

We will create a collection containing two roles to manage server configuration and software installation. Start by using `ansible-creator` to scaffold a directory structure.

[#ansible-creator-cli]
==== 2.1.1: Using the Ansible Creator CLI

NOTE: Choose either this section or <<ansible-creator-gui, 2.1.2 Using the Ansible Creator GUI>>, not both.

. If needed, ensure a terminal is open by selecting the hamburger (3 dashes) in the top left and choosing **Terminal** -> **New Terminal**
. Use `ansible-creator` to quickly scaffold a directory structure to contain a new collection:
+
[source,bash,role=execute]
----
ansible-creator init collection red_hat_one.super_lab /projects/lab_collection/
----
+

> . Add two new roles to manage the software the Windows server:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Add two new roles (`web_server` and `log_shipper`) to manage the software the Windows server:
```

+
[source,bash,role=execute]
----
for role in web_server log_shipper
  do 
    ansible-creator add resource role ${role} /projects/lab_collection/
  done
----
+
. Open the directory at a lower level of the file structure in order to see all of these files in VSCode by selecting the hamburger (3 dashes) menu in the top left and choosing **File** -> **Open Folder**
. The dialogue box should contain #/projects/# then hit **OK**
+
image::20-content-windows/dev_spaces_open_folder.png[Open Folder]
+
. Dev Spaces will reload with the root as the **/projects/** directory

Proceed to <<ansible-creator-content, 2.2: Add content to the collection>>.

[#ansible-creator-gui]
==== 2.1.2: Using the Ansible Creator UI

NOTE: Choose either this section or <<ansible-creator-cli, 2.1.1 Using the Ansible Creator CLI>>, not both.

===== 2.1.2.1: Create a Collection in the UI

Use the `ansible-creator` UI to create a collection:

. Click on the `Ansible` extension icon on the left
. Select **Collection project**
. Fill in the following details:

> .. **Namespace**: #red_hat_one#

Reviewer: I would not recommend including highlighting as it is not included in any other sections

Author: Sounds good, I want to be consistent. I'll review the other labs and make an appropriate change.

.. **Collection**: #super_lab#
.. **Init path**: #/projects/lab_collection#
. Click **Create**
. Lastly, select **Open Collection**
+
image::20-content-windows/ansible_creator_collection.png[Ansible Creator - Collection]

===== 2.1.2.2: Create Roles in the UI

Use the `ansible-creator` UI to create two new roles:

. Click on the `Ansible` extension icon on the left
. Under the **ADD** section select **Role**
. Fill in the following details:
.. **Collection root directory**: #/projects/lab_collection#
.. **Role Name**: #web_server#
. Click **Create**
+
image::20-content-windows/ansible_creator_role1.png[Ansible Creator - Collection]
+

> . Without leaving this screen, keep all the other values the same other than the **Role Name**. Enter a new role called #log_shipper#

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Without leaving this screen, keep all the other values at their defaults with the exception of **Role Name**. Enter a new role called #log_shipper#
```

> . Without leaving this screen, keep all the other values the same other than the **Role Name**. Enter a new role called #log_shipper#

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Without leaving this screen, create the other role by keeping the existing values the same with the exception of the **Role Name** field. Enter a new role called #log_shipper#
```

. Click **Create**
. Close this UI window

> . Click on the icon to return to the file structure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click on the _File Explorer_ icon to return to the file structure
```

+
image::20-content-windows/ansible_creator_role2.png[Ansible Creator - Collection]

Proceed to <<ansible-creator-content, 2.2: Add content to the collection>>.

[#ansible-creator-content]
=== 2.2: Add content to the collection

The following sections can be done in either the UI or CLI. Navigate in the newly created `/projects/lab_collection/roles/` directory to the newly created roles.

image::20-content-windows/collection_dir_tree.png[Collection Roles]

==== 2.2.1: Build Web Server Role

. Navigate to the directory for the `web_server` role. 

> . Create a new task file in the `tasks` directory for the tasks to setup IIS:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a new task file named `setup.yml` in the `tasks` directory for the tasks to setup IIS:
```

----
---
- name: Ensure the website physical path directory exists
  ansible.windows.win_file:
    path: C:\sites\superlab
    state: directory

- name: Copy a sample index.html file to the web root
  ansible.windows.win_template:
    src: files/index.html.j2
    dest: C:\sites\superlab\index.html
    force: true

- name: Create an IIS Website
  microsoft.iis.website:
    name: SuperLabWebsite
    physical_path: C:\sites\superlab
    application_pool: DefaultAppPool
    bindings:
      set:
        - protocol: http
          ip: '*'
          port: 80
    state: started
  register: r_website_status

- name: Display website status
  ansible.builtin.debug:
    var: r_website_status
    verbosity: 1
...
----
+
. Create another new task file in that same `tasks` directory for validation tasks:
+
[source,yaml,role=execute,title="/projects/lab_collection/roles/web_server/tasks/validate.yml"]
----
---
- name: Test IIS locally on the Windows Server
  ansible.windows.win_uri:
    url: "http://localhost"
    return_content: yes
  register: r_local_test

- name: Debug captured result
  ansible.builtin.debug:
    var: r_local_test
    verbosity: 1
...
----
+

> . Next, create the template file for the web server content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Next, create the template file called `index.html.j2` in the `files` directory containing the web server content:
```

+
[source,bash,role=execute,title="/projects/lab_collection/roles/web_server/files/index.html.j2"]
----
Welcome to Super Lab IIS Server
Machine ID {{ ansible_facts['machine_id'] }}
Hostname {{ ansible_facts['fqdn'] + '.' + ansible_facts['interfaces'][0]['dns_domain'] }}

> Deployed on {{ ansible_facts['date_time']['date'] }} at {{ ansible_facts['date_time']['time'] }}

Reviewer 2: If this is to be rendered as HTML, wouldn't you want the content to be HTML too?

```
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
<head>
  <meta charset="UTF-8" />
  <title>Hello, Ansible!</title>
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width,initial-scale=1" />
  <meta name="description" content="" />
</head>
<body>
  <h1>Welcome to Super Lab IIS Server</h1>
  <p>Machine ID {{ ansible_facts['machine_id'] }}</p>
  <p>Hostname {{ ansible_facts['fqdn'] + '.' + ansible_facts['interfaces'][0]['dns_domain'] }}</p>
  <p>Deployed on {{ ansible_facts['date_time']['date'] }} at {{ ansible_facts['date_time']['time'] }}</p>
</body>
</html>
```

----
+
. Next, edit the main task file and replace the contents with the following:
+
[source,yaml,role=execute,title="/projects/lab_collection/roles/web_server/tasks/main.yml"]
----
---
- name: Include setup tasks
  ansible.builtin.include_tasks:
    file: setup.yml

- name: Include website tasks
  ansible.builtin.include_tasks:
    file: website.yml

- name: Include validate tasks
  ansible.builtin.include_tasks:
    file: validate.yml
...
----
+

> . The file structure should look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. The file structure should look similar to the following:
```

...
----
+
. Create another new task file in the `tasks` directory to install our log shipper, Filebeat:
+
[source,yaml,role=execute,title="/projects/lab_collection/roles/log_shipper/tasks/filebeat.yml"]
----
---
- name: Install a filebeat with Chocolatey
  chocolatey.chocolatey.win_chocolatey:
    name: filebeat
    state: present
...
----
+
. Lastly, replace main task file with the following:
+
[source,yaml,role=execute,title="/projects/lab_collection/roles/log_shipper/tasks/main.yml"]
----
---
- name: Include Chocolatey tasks
  ansible.builtin.include_tasks:
    file: chocolatey.yml

- name: Include install tasks
  ansible.builtin.include_tasks:
    file: filebeat.yml
...
----
+
. The file structure should look like this:
+
image::20-content-windows/log_shipper_role.png[Log Shipper Role]

== 3: Build Playbook directory for testing content

Now that the code is written, it is time to try running it. A few steps are needed to do that in Dev Spaces before pushing to git.

NOTE: If needed, ensure a terminal is open by selecting the hamburger (3 dashes) in the top left and choosing **Terminal** -> **New Terminal**

=== 3.1: Use Ansible Creator to create Playbook directory

> For the remainder of this lab the `ansible-creator` CLI will be used for simplicity and speed. It is of course possible to create this same playbook directory from the extension UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the remainder of this lab, the `ansible-creator` CLI will be used for simplicity and speed. It is of course possible to create this same playbook directory from the extension UI.
```

. From Dev Spaces create a playbook directory:
+
[source,bash,role=execute]
----
ansible-creator init playbook red_hat_one.super_lab /projects/lab_playbooks/
----
+
NOTE: If you used the UI method earlier you may only have the collection open. Feel free to use **File** -> **Open Folder** to ensure you can access the new folder under `/projects/lab_playbooks/` in the UI if needed.
+
image::20-content-windows/lab_playbooks_dir.png[Lab Playbooks directory]

=== 3.2: Modify created directory for testing

A few steps need to be taken to modify the scaffold files to ensure they work with this lab.

==== 3.2.1: Populate the Inventory

> . Comment or remove the two entries in `/projects/lab_playbooks/inventory/group_vars/all.yml`, specifically for `ansible_user` to ensure it doesn't interfere with our actual user, which will be provided via a secrets file later instead of announced to the world in inventory.

Reviewer: Any comment related to `ansible_ssh_private_key_file`?

+
image::20-content-windows/group_vars_all.png[group_vars all]
+
. Modify the main inventory file and replace it with these lab details:
+
[source,yaml,role=execute,title="/projects/lab_playbooks/inventory/hosts.yml"]
----
---
all:
  children:
    windows:
      hosts:
        windows:
          ansible_host: windows.aap.svc.cluster.local
          ansible_connection: psrp
          ansible_psrp_auth: negotiate
          ansible_psrp_cert_validation: ignore
...
----

==== 3.2.1: Create secrets file

In AAP a credential is used. We will simulate that here with a file that is NOT committed to any repositories.

. Add the following to a secrets file in your home directory:
+
[source,yaml,role=execute,title="/home/user/secrets.yml"]
----
---
ansible_user: {windows_user}
ansible_password: {windows_password}
...
----
+
NOTE: You may need to do this from a terminal or open the `/home/user/` folder in the UI.

==== 3.2.1: Setup ansible.cfg

> The scaffold file is fine the way it is, specifying the inventory file. However, Automation Hub entries need to be added to install collections. Since we have not configured Automation Hub with the collections required, in this step we will use upstream Hub. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The content within the `ansible.cfg` file that was generated by `ansible-creator` is suitable for our use case. However, Automation Hub entries need to be added in order to install collections. Since we have not configured Private Automation Hub thus far, we will use Red Hat Automation Hub directly. 
```

. First, obtain a token from https://console.redhat.com/ansible/automation-hub/token/[Automation Hub]

> . Under **Offline Token** click **Load Token** and copy this token and store it somewhere secure as it cannot be displayed again

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Under **Offline Token**, click **Load Token** and copy this token and store it in a secure location as it cannot be displayed again
```

+
NOTE: For additional information see https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_ansible_automation_platform/2.6/html/managing_automation_content/managing-cert-valid-content#token-management-hub_cloud-sync[Managing Automation Content Documentation]
+
. Add the following to the provided `ansible.cfg`:
+
[source,bash,role=execute,title="/projects/lab_playbooks/ansible.cfg"]
----
[galaxy]
server_list = hub, hub_validated, galaxy

[galaxy_server.hub]
url=https://console.redhat.com/api/automation-hub/content/published/
auth_url=https://sso.redhat.com/auth/realms/redhat-external/protocol/openid-connect/token
token={your_token}

[galaxy_server.hub_validated]
url=https://console.redhat.com/api/automation-hub/content/validated/
auth_url=https://sso.redhat.com/auth/realms/redhat-external/protocol/openid-connect/token
token={your_token}

[galaxy_server.galaxy]
url=https://galaxy.ansible.com
----
+

> IMPORTANT: Be sure to replace `{your_token}` with the token in step 2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IMPORTANT: Be sure to replace `{your_token}` with the token obtained in step 2.
```

==== 3.2.2: Install python libraries

> Install the required library for either WinRM or PSRP:

Reviewer: Do we want to be prescriptive here? I fear that by being open ended on the options (even before as well), we could run into issues with the students. Maybe we just say, install/use it this way at this point?

----
+
[source,output]
----
removed '/projects/lab_playbooks/collections/ansible_collections/red_hat_one/super_lab/roles/run/README.md'
removed '/projects/lab_playbooks/collections/ansible_collections/red_hat_one/super_lab/roles/run/tasks/main.yml'
removed directory '/projects/lab_playbooks/collections/ansible_collections/red_hat_one/super_lab/roles/run/tasks'
removed directory '/projects/lab_playbooks/collections/ansible_collections/red_hat_one/super_lab/roles/run'
removed directory '/projects/lab_playbooks/collections/ansible_collections/red_hat_one/super_lab/roles'
removed '/projects/lab_playbooks/collections/ansible_collections/red_hat_one/super_lab/README.md'
removed '/projects/lab_playbooks/collections/ansible_collections/red_hat_one/super_lab/CHANGELOG.md'
removed '/projects/lab_playbooks/collections/ansible_collections/red_hat_one/super_lab/meta/runtime.yml'
removed directory '/projects/lab_playbooks/collections/ansible_collections/red_hat_one/super_lab/meta'
removed '/projects/lab_playbooks/collections/ansible_collections/red_hat_one/super_lab/galaxy.yml'
removed directory '/projects/lab_playbooks/collections/ansible_collections/red_hat_one/super_lab/'
----
+

> . Now create a symbolic link to the collection we created earlier:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Now, create a symbolic link to the collection we created earlier:
```

+
[source,bash,role=execute]
----
ln --symbolic --verbose /projects/lab_collection/ /projects/lab_playbooks/collections/ansible_collections/red_hat_one/super_lab
----
+
[source,output]
----
'/projects/lab_playbooks/collections/ansible_collections/red_hat_one/super_lab' -> '/projects/lab_collection/'
----
+
. If you expand `/projects/lab_playbooks/collections/ansible_collections/red_hat_one/super_lab` it show list the two roles created in `/projects/lab_collection/`
+
image::20-content-windows/playbook_dir_with_collection_link.png[Linked Collection Directory]
+
NOTE: This is only for our lab environment, this is not needed for AAP.

==== 3.2.2: Setup Playbook

. Next, replace the contents of `site.yml` with this:
+
[source,yaml,role=execute,title="/projects/lab_playbooks/site.yml"]
----
---
- name: Setup Windows Server
  hosts: windows
  tasks:
    - name: Call web server role
      ansible.builtin.include_role:
        name: red_hat_one.super_lab.web_server

    - name: Call log shipper role
      ansible.builtin.include_role:
        name: red_hat_one.super_lab.log_shipper
...
----

=== 3.3: Test Content

> . Since an `ansible.cfg` and inventory are configured, ensure everything is executed from the `/projects/lab_playbooks/` directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Since an `ansible.cfg` and inventory are configured, ensure all activities are executed from the `/projects/lab_playbooks/` directory by changing into this directory:
```

+
[source,bash,role=execute]
----
cd /projects/lab_playbooks/
----
+

> . Start by replicating the initial `win_ping` from AAP at the start of this lab:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Start by replicating the initial `win_ping` command that was performed within AAP at the start of this lab. Be sure to also reference the Secrets file containing the credential to connect to the Windows as extra variables:
```

+
[source,bash,role=execute]
----
ansible --module-name ansible.builtin.win_ping windows --extra-vars @/home/user/secrets.yml
----
+
[source,output]
----
windows | SUCCESS => {
    "changed": false,
    "ping": "pong"
}
----
+

> . If connectivity worked, execute the entire playbook but start in check mode first:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. If the command succeeded verifying connectivity, execute the entire playbook, but start in _check mode_ first:
```

task path: /projects/lab_playbooks/collections/ansible_collections/red_hat_one/super_lab/roles/web_server/tasks/validate.yml:8
ok: [windows] => {
    "r_local_test": {
        "accept_ranges": "bytes",
        "changed": false,
        "character_set": "ISO-8859-1",
        "content": "<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC \"-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN\" \"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd\">\r\n<html xmlns=\"http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml\">\r\n<head>\r\n<meta http-equiv=\"Content-Type\" content=\"text/html; charset=iso-8859-1\" />\r\n<title>IIS Windows Server</title>\r\n<style type=\"text/css\">\r\n<!--\r\nbody {\r\n\tcolor:#000000;\r\n\tbackground-color:#0072C6;\r\n\tmargin:0;\r\n}\r\n\r\n#container {\r\n\tmargin-left:auto;\r\n\tmargin-right:auto;\r\n\ttext-align:center;\r\n\t}\r\n\r\na img {\r\n\tborder:none;\r\n}\r\n\r\n-->\r\n</style>\r\n</head>\r\n<body>\r\n<div id=\"container\">\r\n<a href=\"http://go.microsoft.com/fwlink/?linkid=66138&amp;clcid=0x409\"><img src=\"iisstart.png\" alt=\"IIS\" width=\"960\" height=\"600\" /></a>\r\n</div>\r\n</body>\r\n</html>",
...
----
+

> . The final task that fails is likely the following. This is due to a requirement that hasn't been installed yet:

Reviewer: @vvaldez this error occurred instead

```
[ERROR]: Task failed: Module failed: specified folder must already exist: physical_path
Origin: /projects/lab_playbooks/collections/ansible_collections/red_hat_one/super_lab/roles/web_server/tasks/website.yml:13:3

11     force: true
12
13 - name: Create an IIS Website
     ^ column 3

fatal: [windows]: FAILED! => {"changed": false, "msg": "specified folder must already exist: physical_path"}
```

PLAY RECAP **************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************
windows                    : ok=21   changed=9    unreachable=0    failed=0    skipped=1    rescued=0    ignored=0   
----
+

> . If everything worked, after a few minutes the server will be configured and running both IIS and Filebeat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. If everything worked, after a few minutes, the server will be configured and running both IIS and Filebeat.
```

. Use `curl` to test the site remotely:
+
[source,bash,role=execute]
----
curl http://windows.aap.svc.cluster.local
----
+
[source,output]
----
Welcome to Super Lab IIS Server
Machine ID S-1-5-21-2979851890-3482578088-4054385452
Hostname windows.lab.sandbox-5tt52-ocp4-cluster.svc.cluster.local
----
+

> . Run check mode once again, this time it will succeed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Run check mode once again. This time, it will succeed:
```

+
[source,bash,role=execute]
----
ansible-playbook site.yml --extra-vars @/home/user/secrets.yml --check
----
+

> . This time the validate tasks content matches `curl`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. This time the validate tasks content matches the output from our `curl` command:
```

TASK [red_hat_one.super_lab.web_server : Debug captured result] *********************************************************************************************************************************************************
task path: /projects/lab_playbooks/collections/ansible_collections/red_hat_one/super_lab/roles/web_server/tasks/validate.yml:8
ok: [windows] => {
    "r_local_test": {
        "accept_ranges": "bytes",
        "changed": false,
        "character_set": "ISO-8859-1",
        "content": "Welcome to Super Lab IIS Server\r\nMachine ID S-1-5-21-2979851890-3482578088-4054385452\r\nHostname windows.lab.sandbox-gtjkm-ocp4-cluster.svc.cluster.local\r\nDeployed on 2026-01-14 at 17:29:19\r\n",
...
----

== 3: Next Steps

> In the next lab we will create an execution environment containing this collection, build it and commit everything to git.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next lab, we will create an Execution Environment containing this collection, build it and commit everything to a git repository.
```

== Conclusion

In this lab, you have learned how to:

. Validate connectivity to Windows servers from AAP
. Use `ansible-creator` to scaffold the collection, roles, playbooks and inventory associated with automation targeting a Windows instance

> . Create content using `ansible.windows` and `microsoft.iis` collections

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create content using the `ansible.windows` and `microsoft.iis` collections
```

. Create content to ensure prerequisites are installed including .NET and Chocolatey
. Use Chocolatey to install Filebeat
. Use Dev Spaces and Ansible Development Tools (ADT) to create, modify and test content

== Helpful Links

For additional references, refer to the following resources:

. https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_ansible_automation_platform/2.6/html/using_ansible_development_workspaces_for_automation_content_development/index[Using Ansible Development Workspaces for Automation Content Development]

> . https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_dev_spaces/3.23/html/user_guide/getting-started-with-devspaces#authenticating-to-a-git-server-from-a-workspace[Authenticating to a Git server from a Workspace].

Reviewer: No need to include the Dev Spaces reference articles as the students would have become familiar in module 1. In addition, no git activities were performed

Ansible can use a variety of connectivity options to connect to Windows. In this lab, a Windows 2019 Server has been configured using `psrp` to connect. See the link:https://docs.ansible.com/projects/ansible/latest/os_guide/intro_windows.html[Ansible documentation] for full details.

=== 1.1: Validate Connectivity to Windows host

The Windows server has been configured as a host in an inventory called **super-lab**. Verify in AAP:

. Launch the link:{aap_controller_web_url}[Ansible Automation Platform,window=_blank] web interface and login using the credentials from the xref:environment-details.adoc[Environment Details,window=_blank] page.
. From the navigation menu on the left, expand **Automation Execution** and click on **Infrastructure**.
. Under **Infrastructure** select **Inventories** which should contain an inventory called **super-lab**
+
image::20-content-windows/aap_inventories.png[AAP Inventories]
+
. Select **super-lab**
. Select **Hosts** in the top menu
. A host called **windows** will be displayed
. Select the checkbox in front of **windows** and choose **Run command** in the top middle of the screen
+
image::20-content-windows/aap_run_command.png[Run Command]
+

> . For **Module** choose **win_ping** from the drop-down then **Next**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. For **Module**, choose **win_ping** from the drop-down then click **Next**
```
